May 4th 2025

These are the main scripts used in my capstone project and encompass all of the analysis and results discussed in my capstone paper. Auto_Lags and Historical_Data_Merge were made first, followed by Correlation_Matrix, FFT_Test, Signal_Processing_for_SARIMA, SARIMA, Random_Forest, Neural_Network, and Isoprene_Discussion_Plots.
Brief descriptions of each script are listed in markdown at the top of each notebook.

Project Absract:

Ozone air pollution poses a large health threat to populations along the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains in Colorado, regularly exceeding federal safety regulations. Isoprene, a terrestrially emitted compound, is partially responsible for ozone pollution through its impact on atmospheric chemistry. This study constructs and evaluates three machine learning architectures (SARIMA, neural networks, and random forests) to determine the plausibility of using a data-based approach to forecast isoprene 24 hours in advance compared with existing physics-based models. Locally sourced meteorology and chemical data were collected from an air monitoring site in Longmont, Colorado, and combined with satellite and simulation data of vegetative growth, drought, and humidity conditions from 2021 through 2024. Of the predictors, time-lagged isoprene autocorrelations, temperature, ozone, leaf area index, and photosynthetically active radiation were the most correlated with isoprene levels. None of the models performed well, with low R-values and predicted RMSE values greater than the test sample mean. However, relative to existing physics-based methods, the ML models were not far off in terms of performance and can likely be improved through applying more advanced architectures like LSTMs. This research is some of the first of its kind and shows the potential for applying ML forecasting to isoprene data given further future exploration. With improvement, the methods tested in this project may provide a simpler alternative to complicated physics models or even act as an input to improve them and better protect and inform the public from excessive air pollution in Colorado.
